Direct File
===========

`Direct File <https://directfile.irs.gov>`__ is a service from the
United States Government that provides taxpayers the option to
electronically file their federal tax return for free, directly with the
Internal Revenue Service (IRS). Direct File is an interview-based
service that is intended to work as well on a mobile phone as it does on
a laptop, tablet, or desktop computer. It is available in English and
Spanish and is designed to be accessible to taxpayers who have a variety
of attitudes, aptitudes, abilities, and access needs.

Direct File interprets the United States’ `Internal Revenue Code (26
USC) <https://www.irs.gov/privacy-disclosure/tax-code-regulations-and-official-guidance>`__
as plain language questions, the answers to which should be known to
taxpayers without need of external instructions or publications.
Taxpayers’ answers are then translated into standard tax forms and
transmitted to the IRS’s `Modernized e-File
(MeF) <https://www.irs.gov/e-file-providers/modernized-e-file-program-information>`__
API, which is available for authorized public use. These questions and
logic, developed in close collaboration with the IRS `Office of Chief
Counsel <https://www.irs.gov/about-irs/office-of-chief-counsel-at-a-glance>`__,
as well as the associated test cases and scenarios, may be useful for
others working on products that need to accurately interpret United
States tax law as of Tax Year 2024.

Direct File also incorporates the Fact Graph, a declarative, XML-based
knowledge graph data structure that is designed to reason about
incomplete information, such as a partially completed tax return. The
Fact Graph is written in the Scala programming language; it runs on the
JVM on the backend and is transpiled via
`Scala.js <https://www.scala-js.org>`__ to run on the client as well.
Direct File’s Fact Graph is not domain-specific, and it may be useful to
revenue agencies and as a reference for business rules engine
implementations.

Although Direct File only files federal tax returns, United States
taxpayers also have state and local filing obligations. Direct File
facilitates the completion of these obligations by enabling taxpayers to
optionally import their federal return data into a third-party tool that
can file state and/or local taxes, without needing to reenter
information. This transaction is enabled via a State API, which
transfers both standard MeF XML as well as an enriched JSON format that
includes additional data elements that were identified as being useful
to state revenue agencies to streamline the state tax experience.

Direct File was developed by an in-house team of technologists at the
IRS. The blended, cross-agency team included support from
`USDS <https://www.usds.gov>`__ and `GSA <https://www.gsa.gov/>`__, as
well as vendor teams `TrussWorks <https://truss.works>`__,
`Coforma <https://coforma.io>`__, and
`ATI <https://atisolutions.us/>`__.

For a more details on the program and its history see
https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p5969.pdf and
https://www.irs.gov/filing/irs-direct-file-for-free

Where do I start?
-----------------

See `ONBOARDING.md </ONBOARDING.md>`__ if you want to jump into running
Direct File locally

Exempted Code
-------------

Not all source code, documentation and metadata used in the development
of Direct File is included in this repository. Specifically, any code or
data that is considered Personally Identifiable Information (PII),
Federal Tax Information (FTI), Sensitive But Unclassified (SBU), or
source code developed for National Security Systems (NSS), as defined in
40 U.S.C. § 11103, is exempt. Due to these restrictions, certain pieces
of functionality have been removed or rewritten.

Authorities
===========

Legal foundations for work include: \* Source code Harmonization And
Reuse in Information Technology Act” of 2024, Public Law 118 - 187 \*
OMB Memorandum M-16-21, “Federal Source Code Policy: Achieving
Efficiency, Transparency, and Innovation through Reusable and Open
Source Software,” August 8, 2016 \* Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR)
Part 27 – Patents, Data, and Copyrights \* Digital Government Strategy:
“Digital Government: Building a 21st Century Platform to Better Serve
the American People,” May 23, 2012 \* Federal Information Technology
Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), December 2014 (National Defense
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2015, Title VIII, Subtitle D) \*
E-Government Act of 2002, Public Law 107-347 \* Clinger-Cohen Act of
1996, Public Law 104-106
